Hasan beyond the limit that my power of imagination had drawn.
    
The Subject of children’s painting has recently been taken into hand under a new light by Educationalists, psychologists and aestheticians, allmost everywhere in the World, and the art education of children in comparatively progressive schools has been given a new direction. The results of this new impetus show certain common "characteristics in children’s painting.
    
Yet these characteristics cannot be found in Hasan Kaptan's work. Some of them might have existed in his earlier paintings, but how, they do hot exist at all.

Hasan Kaptan cannot anymore be regarded as a child painter.

A never failing sense of colour, balance and composition has always distinguished his work. I pital “U”. They are the elements that the artist borrows. The pink as well as the blue, among them. In replacing the blue with the pink, the artist does nothing more than exereising the right recognized to him by the Universe.
    
Hasan has always given the greatest place in his canvasses, to human beings; in that he has gone further than any other Turkish artist. When he was only six or seven years old, he would scold, in his polite way, older painters of reputation whom he knew, for not dealing with the subject of Man in all their works.

Human beings, in Hasan’s recent works, are passing through a transition period smilar to that between the arts of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance: They are becoming more alive and tangible; they are coming down to earth; they are coming out from a world of imagdnation to the world of reality.

At, this stage Hasan, happens to have removed a curtain and discovered the window of the human soul! He discovered the eyes!. And now, this great little man, who has always felt deeply for humanity. cannot leave these windows.
   
Eyes are everyhere on most of his new canvasses. Eyes looking and eyes looked into; some discreetly parted: some, giving all secrets away; and some are closed keepink silent.
  
Hasan has also tricks with eyes: He has painted a woman juggler with two pairs of eyes; and her child looks up with one eye, and looks down with the other.
   
A visitor to the exhibition asked Hasan: “Why are these eyes so unusual?” and he answered: “Well, they are jugglers; you can expect-anything from them!”

