Twin City Sentinel

U.N. Day To Feature TV Program

Plans for a United Nations Day television program and two tree-plantings have been set by members of the UN Day observance committee here.

Don Britt, assistant to the president of Salem College, is in charge of the television show. He said it will be seen during the “Hour Glass” program on WSJS from 4:30 to 5 p.m. Sunday (United Nations Day).

Three foreign students at Salem will appear on the first part of the program and will be interviewed, Mr. Britt said.

They are Erlinda Abueg of the Phillipines, Maria Ines Astorga of Chile and Gull-Mari Lundburg of Sweden.

The remainder of the time will be devoted to a panel discussion moderated by Mr. Britt. Panel members will include Winfield Blackwell, attorney and chairman of the observance committee; Wallace Carroll, executive news editor of the Journal and Sentinel; Bulend Ecevit, visiting Turkish journalist; Mrs. F. A. Blount, expresident of the Winston-Salem League of Women Voters; and Mrs. Everett Fox, executive director of the Patterson Avenue branch, YWCA.

The panel will try to bring out the purpose of the UN, its future possibilities and its strong and weak points, Mr. Britt said.

Tree plantings will commemorate the observance at Winston-Salem’s two newest schools: Diggs School in Happy Hill and Whitaker School in Buena Vista.

Ed McKee, committee member in charge of school observances, said the planting at Diggs will be at 9:15 a.m. Friday and at Whitaker one hour later. Mr. Blackwell will speak briefly for both ceremonies. Trees were donated by L. A. Reynolds Nurseries, Mr. McKee said.

Other schools will recognize the observance with chapel programs and poster displays, Mr. McKee said.

Participation by business, civic, fraternal, church and service groups is being organized by other members of the observance committee. Theme for this year's UN Day celebration is “The UN Depends on You.”

The longest railway bridge of any kind in the world is the 12-mile Lucin Cutoff, a wooden file structure carrying the Southern Pacific tracks over Great Salt Lake in Utah.